Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're going to continue working on our live search feature.
Let's jump right into the action, OK, for our first task in this lesson, let's set things up so that
as soon as you click on the search icon, you should be able to begin immediately typing, meaning your
cursor should be placed into this field or this field should be selected or focused for you to make
this happen.
Let's begin by selecting this text input field with our JavaScript.
So within your text editor in our search JS file, within our constructor, let's create a new property
and say this dot, let's name it input field and let's set that to equal and then just use document
dot query selector.
And I can let you know that that field element has an idea.
So hash tag, it has an idea of live dash search, dash field.
All right.
Now let's go down to our event for open overlay.
And as soon as we add the class that will make the overlay visible, then right below that we can just
say this dot input field and then call a method on it named focus.
This will focus the element or in other words, placed the user's cursor there so they can begin typing
into the field.
However, because the div that this field lives within was hidden until this line of code ran, certain
browsers will run into issues and not be able to focus this element.
What we can do to get around this is after we make the search overlay visible, let's wait maybe 50
milliseconds and then focus that TextField.
So cut this focus line into your clipboard and let's set a time out, set time out and we just give
this to arguments.
So Akama, be the first is a function that you want to run.
The second is how long you want to wait before running it.
So for the second argument, let's just say maybe 50 milliseconds, something that will not be noticeable
to the user, but will give the browser enough time to realize that that div is now visible.
So, yes, you can focus the TextField instead of a placeholder.
Let's create an arrow function here.
We don't need curly brackets and we can just paste in our clipboard.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out back in the browser by refresh.
As soon as I click the search icon, you can see my cursor is blinking and I can immediately begin typing.
Perfect.
Now, before we begin programming, what should happen once the user does start typing in text, let's
first make a quick fix for browsers that are not logged in and therefore they don't see a search icon.
They just see a log in form.
Let's do this within our text editor, within our main JS file, where we are importing in the search
module when we actually create a new instance of search, which is what triggers our constructor from
the class and sets everything in motion.
Let's just wrap this within an if statement.
So cut that into your clipboard and then let's say if the parentheses curly brackets for the condition,
if document dot, query selector and then let's look for an element that has a class of header search
icon.
Only if that element exists on the current page, then do this whatever we include in the curly brackets
so we can just paste in our clipboard.
Let's go ahead and save that.
Now, in a browser where I'm logged in, you can see our search.
JavaScript is still working, but for users that are not logged in, their browser will not even worry
executing any of that search javascript.
Cool.
Now let's get back to the task at hand.
So once a user actually starts typing something into this field, the question becomes, what do we
want to do in response?
Well, first of all, we know that we do not want the search results area to be showing right away.
Instead, we'd want this area to be empty.
And then as soon as the user begins typing in a value, let's show a spinning progress load or icon
right about here.
OK, so let's jump into our search J.S. file and up in the constructor.
Let's begin by creating a property that selects this results area.
So within the constructor, let's create a new property, this dot and let's name it results area and
set that to equal document query selector.
And it has a class of live search results to make sure that that area is not visible.
At first we can just go down to our HTML template within our inject HTML method.
And in between these two chunks of code we see a line break in this second chunk of code, about four
lines.
Into it, we see a div with a class of live search results and then it has a second class of live search
results, dash, dash visible.
Let's get rid of this second class, OK?
And that alone should hide that results area.
So if I refresh, click on search.
Perfect.
Now let's set things up so that as soon as you start typing into this field in response, we show a
spinning progress load or icon here.
So back in our text editor up in our constructor, let's begin by creating another property, let's
say this dot and let's name it loader icon.
Let's set that to equal document dot query selector and it has a class of circle loader.
So I've already included an element with this class in the HTML template.
So now all we need to do is add a class to it to make it visible at the right moment.
And the right moment is as soon as someone starts typing into this field.
So let's just set up a new event within our events area.
Let's just add a new line here and let's say this DOT input field, right.
That's the text field they can begin typing into.
Let's add an event to it.
So dot an event listener in this case instead of click, the event that we're interested in listening
for is key.
So once they press a key on their keyboard and then release their finger from that key and that key
comes up, this event will be triggered, let's say, comma.
And the second argument is a function that we want to run in response.
Let's provide an arrow function so that the this keyword is not changed.
And let's just call a method that we can create ten seconds from now.
So this dot and let's name it key press handler parentheses to actually call it the reason we're not
just directly including code here to show the spinner icon is because we actually are going to need
some decently complex logic to determine when we should show the loader versus when we should do something
else.
But let's not get ahead of ourselves for now.
Let's just create a method with this matching name.
So key press handler.
So within our methods area, I will create a new method, let's name it key press handler parentheses
curly brackets within this method.
Let's start simple before we build out any complex logic.
Let's begin by just showing the spinning or icon.
We haven't created this method yet, but you can imagine we could just call this dot show loader icon.
OK, then right below this.
Let's create a method with this matching name.
So show load or icon parentheses, curly brackets.
Now, within this method, we just need to select an HTML element from our template and then add a class
to it that will make it visible.
Let's say this dot loader icon dot class list, dot add and let's give it a class of circle dash loader
dash dash visible.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out.
So if I refresh and click on the search icon, as soon as I begin typing, you can see this spinner
icon appears.
Now here's where things get interesting.
The question becomes exactly when do we want to send off an asynchronous request to our server to find
posts about catnip?
Because we don't actually want to send off a new request after every keystroke.
For example, if a user typed in catnip, they begin by pressing C, so we wouldn't want to send off
a network request to search for just see.
And then when they type in a we wouldn't want to just search for K.
So instead of sending off a new search request after every keystroke instead, why don't we wait maybe
five to seven hundred milliseconds after they've stopped typing in new characters.
This way we don't flood our server with unnecessary requests.
Right.
If someone wants to search for puppy, we don't need to send off a search for just P and then P you
and then P p.
Let's just wait a tiny bit after they've stopped typing and then send off a request.
So to keep track of that timing, let's do this within our constructor.
Let's create a new property so this dot and let's name it typing wait timer.
For now we don't need to set it to equal anything.
We're just making sure that this property exists on our object so that we can.
Work with it later, also, before we continue, I want to point something else out back in the browser
if I refresh and open up the search.
What if a user presses the left or right arrow key on their keyboard?
There's no sense in showing the spinner icon because they didn't actually type anything into the field.
So let's also set things up so that we keep track of the previous value in between each keystroke.
And only if the value of this field has changed would we consider that an event worth paying attention
to.
So within our constructor, let's create another property.
Let's name it this dot previous value to start, let's set it to equal an empty string or an empty pair
of quotes.
All right.
Now let's go use these two new variables within our key press handler.
So here's that method.
Key press handler.
Let's actually cut this show load or icon line into our clipboard.
OK, so we have a clean slate.
Let's begin by creating a variable, let's name it value and let's set it to equal the current value
of the TextField.
So this input field value then at the very end of this function, let's update our previous value.
So this previous value equals value.
Now, in between these two lines, let's do something interesting.
Let's say if parentheses curly brackets for the condition, let's say if value is not empty.
And so ampersand, ampersand, and it's different than the previous value, meaning whatever key they
just pressed actually changed the value of the TextField.
So value does not equal this dot previous value.
If this evaluates to true, then we actually would want to show the lotus icon.
So you could paste in your clipboard here.
This does show lower icon.
This is also where we can begin a timer.
Remember, we wanted to wait maybe seven hundred milliseconds after they've stopped typing to actually
send off a request.
So let's say this dot typing wait timer equals and then we can use JavaScript, set time out and we
give it two arguments, A comma, B, the first is a function.
The second is how many milliseconds you want to wait before running that, let's say seven hundred and
fifty milliseconds actually to test that this delay feature is working.
Let's choose an absurdly large value here.
So maybe three thousand milliseconds once we can test things out and confirm that it's working as expected,
we can choose a much lower value here, OK, for the function that we'd want to run after this delay,
let's imagine that we have a method that will send off a request to our server.
Instead of listing a function here directly, let's actually provide an arrow function so that the this
keyword does not change.
So then we can call this dot and imagine will create a method named send request parentheses to call
it.
Now, here's the important part.
We don't want to just queue up a new request for each keystroke and simply wait three seconds after
they press the key to send off a request.
However, that's what this current code would achieve.
So what we need to do instead, maybe at the start of this, if block is clear, the previous timer,
so we can say clear time out and then we just tell it which time out we want to clear.
So this dot typing wait timer.
So think of it like this.
Let's say someone's trying to search for the word puppy.
They type in P.
This would evaluate to true.
Since they just pressed that key, our timer gets set to zero, then we begin counting towards our 3000
milliseconds.
So the clock is ticking.
Who knows, maybe they're very slow at typing and this gets all the way up to two thousand milliseconds
before they press the U.
The second letter in puppy.
At that point the timer would reset.
We are clearing that time out.
So then it would have to start over again and begin from zero counting up to this delay.
But when they actually do stop typing for this long, then this will finally happen.
So to test this out right now, let's create a method with this name.
And just as a test, we can show an annoying alert message.
So let's create a new method, maybe right above show load or icon.
Let's say send request parentheses, curly brackets.
And just for a test, we can say.
Alert send request method just ran.
Let's go ahead and give this a save and test it out.
So if I refresh and open up the search, if I just keep pressing different letters on my keyboard and
never wait three thousand milliseconds, you'll notice that nothing ever happens.
However, if I stop typing and then we wait three seconds.
Perfect send request method just ran.
OK, now for our final task in this lesson, let's adjust that send request method to actually send
off an asynchronous request to our server.
We could use the web browsers built in or native feature named Fetch, but I prefer to use a library
named Axios to send off asynchronous requests.
Luckily, since we're using Web pack to bundle up our front end JavaScript, we can very easily leverage
NPM packages.
So let's open up our command line.
If your server is currently running press control, see to quit and let's install a package.
So NPM install in the package we're interested in is Axios.
So that's a axios go ahead and press enter.
OK, then let's start up our server again, so npm run watch.
OK, now up at the very top of our search dogs file, even before we include export default, let's
add a new line at the very top and say import axios from the axios package.
Cool.
So that's similar to requiring in a package.
Now we can leverage it so down within our send request method.
Here it is.
Instead of that annoying alert message, let's say Axios, let's use its post method to send a post
request and we give this to arguments.
The first is a U.
RL that we want to send a request to.
So let's just say forward slash the base of this current domain and then let's say search.
In our next lesson, we can set up a route in our Express app that matches a post request to slash search.
OK, for the second argument, instead of this placeholder B, we include an object with any data that
we want to send along to the server.
Let's include a property named search term and then let's set it so Colen to whatever this text field
currently holds.
So that would just be this dot input field dot value.
Cool.
Now the Axios library is going to return a promise.
So at the end of this, let's use the dot, then dot catch syntax.
Let's provide functions within both then and catch so we can use an arrow function.
Let's do the same thing for catch.
Now, as of this moment in Express, we have not set up a route for a search, so this promise is going
to reject instead of resolve.
So just as a test within catch, let's just show an alert and say hello.
The request failed.
Let's go ahead and save this and test it out back in the browser by refresh.
He click the search icon type and then wait three seconds.
Perfect.
I've never been happier to see a message say that something failed.
This means the Axios library is doing its job.
It's sent off an asynchronous network request to our server.
And now all we need to do in our next lesson is set up a slash search route in our express app.
That is when everything will really start to come together.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.